Alright. Can everyone hear me okay? Can y'all
hear me in the back? Alright. Amazing. And
Zoom people, let me know if you can't
hear me or anything. Okay. First off, welcome
everyone to WebLab. I am so it makes
me so excited to see you guys. I'm
Abby. I am the academic chair for WebLab,
which means I am in charge of coordinating
basically everything that you all of the academic
lecture content that you see over the next
two weeks. So if you have a problem
with the lecture content and you're like, Oh
my gosh, this was terrible, or, Please help,
then come ask me. Any questions are okay.
So we're gonna start by learning about Git.
If you have a CS background, you probably
already know Git to some extent. If you
do, feel to tune me out. But hopefully
this lecture will be helpful. Is So WebLab
is designed to be friendly to people who
have no coding experience whatsoever, which is why
we're starting from ground zero. However, it does
go fast. So if we're going through Git
stuff or whatever and you don't understand and
you get lost, please just don't worry about
it. Take a breath. You can come to
office hours and we'll help you learn the
concepts And also, you'll just get familiar with
it as you keep going on and doing
more of it. So don't worry if you
cannot pick up 100% of it at the
very beginning. So yeah. Without further ado, let's
dive into it. So the main question for
today is how do we collaborate on code?
This is Tony, he was co academic chair
with me last year. This is Tisai, you'll
meet him soon, and that's me. And we're
working together on a coding project. So how
do we work together? Well, you might think,
let's do something like Google Docs, but Google
Code. And it'll live update, so any changes
I make, everyone will be able to immediately
see. That's great, right? Well, not quite. Consider
the following. So let's say that Tony and
Nick are working together on this project, and
Nick is working on the home page while
Tony is simultaneously working on another part of
the website that the home page needs in
order to run. And then Tony is working
on it, and then the thing that he's
working on goes down as he is making
his improvements. And Nick is like, bro, what
happened? And Tony is very happy about the
upgrades that he's making. But Nick is not
as happy about the upgrades Tony is making.
And so the basic idea is we need
independent copies of the code so that both
Nick and Tony can work on the code,
or Nick can work on his part while
Tony can work on his part, but if
Tony breaks this thing as he's making his
upgrades, Nick still has a copy of the
old working version of whatever Tony was working
on so that he can still work on
his homepage. But then if we have independent
copies of the code, that creates a lot
of problems for us. Because now, typically when
we're coding, we don't have just one file.
We have a heck ton of files. And
so there are all these files that Nick
has a copy of and Tony has a
copy of. And let's say they're making changes.
Maybe they're making changes in different parts of
the files, but if you notice, both Nick
and Tony have made changes in the same
file. And then in order to merge those
changes together, one of them has to do
the hard work of copying over the changes
one by one, and that's really sad. So
an hour of copying and pasting later, after
making 10 gazillion changes to this file, Tony
realizes, oh, crap. I just needed those lines
that we just deleted. And so when I
see this slide, I imagine, like, the, like,
suspenseful movie music playing and everyone, like, typing
furiously on their computers. Computers. But let's just
say, okay, for the sake of example, that
Nick and Tony are just really good at
collaborating. Nick is a beast with a copy
and paste. They're so good at communication. But
then I come in. I'm like, hey, guys.
What you doing? Can I join? Can I
help you guys? And then I don't know
what the heck is going on. So to
summarize the problems that we just described, there's
a few things that we need in order
to collaborate on code. One, what makes this
different from document editing is that we need
independent local copies of the code base. So
I can work on stuff on my computer
without breaking anybody else's code. We also need
to be able to merge the changes that
I'm making with the changes that someone else
is making pretty seamlessly. We need to be
able to keep track of versions, so if
I realize that I broke something and I
don't know what the crap just happened to
what what I just did to my code,
I can roll it back. And we need
to know, obviously, which version is the most
up to date. So we could think about
all these problems and do all of this
ourselves, but thankfully, really smart people have already
thought about this and solved it all for
us and they made Git. So what is
Git exactly? At a core level, it basically
just tracks changes in files using some fancy
math. So if I'm editing a file, I
type in, like corgis, at the bottom of
this doc, and I delete the line and
about cats, then the core functionality of git
is just keeping track of these changes that
I made. So this information that I added
this and deleted that is what git stores.
Oops. Oh, yes. We are gonna see an
example. Okay. So before we go on any
further and explain what's going on, we're going
to I'm gonna show you how to create
a Git repo and also show you a
few basic terminal commands in the process. So
if you have done the homework zero setup,
then you will have git installed on your
machine. It should be already if you have
a Mac, but if you have a Windows,
you might need to install git bash. So
I'm gonna open up my Versus code, and
I have a folder called web lab that
I'm gonna put all of my web lab
stuff in. And here, if I go to
terminal and then new terminal, then I can
open up this guy. If you're on Windows,
then you might need to hit the plus
down arrow button in order to get the
terminal here to be git bash and not,
like, something silly like command prompt. Or you
can also, alternatively, open up the terminal or
git bash in your, like, just in your
computer as a whole. This and this are
the same thing. Since I'm on Windows, I'm
using Git Bash, but if you're on Mac,
you would just use terminal. And the terminal
is basically just a way for us to
interact with our computer. So I can interact
with my computer by clicking and dragging things
if by going to file explorer or finder.
And this is just insanely more powerful way
of doing that. So some basic terminal commands
you'll probably need are l s, which means
list. So it's just going to list out
everything that I have in the directory or
folder that I'm currently in. Another command you'll
need is c d. So that stands for
change directory. So let's say I wanna go
into my catbook react directory. You'll see what
that is later. Then I go inside, and
now you'll notice that I'm inside my catbook
react directory. And if I l s, I
can see everything that's inside of there. Now
let's say I wanna go back out of
Catbook React, back into my web lab folder,
I'll do c d dot dot, and that
just stands for the directory that's one directory
back from where I currently am. Okay. Feel
free to follow along, but you don't have
to. I'll give you time to try it
out on your own. And then another command
that I'll use is make directory, m k
d I r, and that will create a
new folder. So I'm gonna create a new
folder called git demo for this lecture's purposes.
And I hate these Zoom floating meeting controls.
Alright. And so now that I have this
new folder, I'm going to go into it,
c d into git demo, and issue this
command called git init. And that just creates
a new git repository within that folder that
I'm currently in. So now, we have this
file called dot git, and dot git is
the file that we don't need to worry
about, but git uses in order to track
all of the changes to any files within
my git demo folder. And so now, my
git demo folder is a git repository. Cool.
Alright. So now I'm gonna give you guys
a chance to try that yourselves. So I'll
give you, like, two minutes to try creating
a new directory, c d ing into it,
calling git init. I'll give you, like, one
minute and then we'll see where people are
at. I need my phone to time. And
if you're having any technical issues, feel free
to add yourself to weblab.is/q and a staff
member will come help you. You're free to
add yourself to the queue even while I'm
yapping, and people can come help you. And
let me know if you have any questions.
Alright. If you think you need more time,
please hold up a finger, one, two, three,
four, etcetera, for how many more minutes you
think you need. Okay. We've got a few
people. I'll give you guys a little bit
more time. Alright. If you're having trouble I'm
gonna move on. But if you're having trouble
and you need a reference, the commands to
run, you can either look on with someone
nearby, or if you go to weblab.is/schedule, all
of the slides are linked there. So if
you just go to weblab.is/schedule, find my lecture,
git basics, click on the Google Docs, Google
Slides link, then you should be able to
pull up the slides and reference anything that
you might be behind on. Okay. So now
we're gonna talk about what we actually, as
programmers, do with git. And that is make
changes to our code, because we're productive programmers.
So the basic idea of Git is that
it keeps track of a history of all
of the changes that we've made to our
code, and the individual sort of units of
changes that we make are called commits. And
it's almost like they're it's a package set
of code changes. What do I mean by
that? Well, let's say we're making we're here,
and we're editing a bunch of our files.
We delete the line, I like cats, from
one file, we add the line, I like
corgis, to another file, add more lines, make
more code changes, etcetera. And then once we're
ready to sort of package those changes up,
then and add it to our commit history,
then we have something called the staging area.
And this is basically where we put all
of the code changes that we're going to
want to package up into our commit. So
the command we use is called git add,
and then we put in the name of
the file. So let's say we do git
add woof dot py. That will add all
of the changes we've made to woof dot
py to the staging area. And then if
we add cats dot py as well, then
we're adding the change we made there also
to the staging area. And once we're ready
to commit, we do git commit dash m
with a message that describes what that commit
is. Oops, that slide is not right. There
should be the cats thing in there too.
And let's say we call it dogs and
cats. And then what that does is it
takes all those changes that were in the
staging area, boxes them up, slaps on a
label that says what the changes are about,
and adds it to our commit history. And
so then, the staging area is refreshed and
there's a new box and we can do
git add more to add to our next
commit. Okay. So I'm going to demo what
that looks like in our Versus code, and
why do I keep having the floating meeting
controls? Oh my gosh. Okay. So we have
our git demo folder, and let's make some
changes. I am going to add a new
file, and I'm going to call it abby
dot t x t. And I am not
going to use Copilot to write something. I'm
gonna say, Abby likes cats. I'll just type
that. And then I'm gonna use a command
called git status to just see where I
am, and it tells me that I'm I
don't have any commits yet, and there's one
file that they call untracked that has not
been added to the staging area, so that's
why it's red. Git recorded that I made
this change, but it's not in the staging
area yet, so I'm gonna add it. So
I'm gonna say git add, and then abby
dot txt. And now, if I do git
status, I can see that it says, changes
to be committed, new file abby dot t
x t. So that means that git says
that this file is in my staging area.
And if I wanna commit it, then I
can do git commit m abby, or whatever
I wanna call it, and it created my
commit. And now I can run a command
called git log, and git log just tells
me all of the oh, sorry, all of
the commits that I have in my history.
So when I say git log, now there's
one commit that I just made in my
log. And if I want to make more
changes, make more commits, then those commits will
show up in my commit log. So now
I'm gonna give you guys a chance to
try that in your own repos. So I'll
give you, like, two to three minutes to
play around with it, make as many changes,
make as many commits as you want. And
again, if you have any questions, let me
know or add yourself to the queue. Also,
Zoom people, you can also add yourself to
the queue. You can just put a Zoom
link for, like, your own Zoom room if
you need technical help. How's it going over
here? Any questions? Oh, wait. I need to
turn this off. Alright. Same as before. Give
me a one, two, three, four, etcetera fingers
if you need more time. Cool. I see
a lot of hands. So I will give
you guys a couple more minutes. Alright. Hopefully,
was enough time. We're going to move on.
Okay. So in git, once we've made our
commits and everything, in the previous slide, we
were showing commits as a package set of
code changes and we were using these little
package things with the labels as our picture.
But in typical, like, whenever you If you
look up anything about git, they will typically
use graphs that look a little bit more
like this. And these are, basically, each circle
just represents a commit. And each circle, each
commit has a unique ID, which is going
to be, if we look in our git
log, you'll notice that there's the commit message
here, but there's also this gigantic, redonkulous looking
string. And that's the ID for our commit.
So any time in git, if we want
to do something and refer to that particular
commit that we made, then we're going to
use this ID. And so this slide is
just to familiarize you with the notion of
having these graphs where each circle represents a
commit. And so this represents the history of
all of the sets of changes that we've
made. Okay. So now consider the following. We
have a scenario. Tony is working on his
new and improved homepage to his website, and
then Andrew comes along. Andrew was one of
our staff last year. And he's like, can
you help me fix this bug on the
home page? And Tony's like, I got you,
bro. And then Abby comes in and she
goes, Tony, we need a WebLab Tinder feature
to be added to our website tomorrow, and
you need to do it right now. And
so now Tony's a little bit confused, because
he was working on his home page. He
was trying to make a new version of
the home page, and so he was changing
a ton of stuff in the code, deleting
stuff, adding things. And then Andrew comes along
and he's like, can you help me fix
this bug on the original home page? So
now Tony has to somehow go back to
the code on the original home page in
order to fix the bug on that. And
then Abby comes along and is like, we
need you to work on this. And then
he somehow has to revert again in order
to work off of the original working code
to make this new WebLab Tinder feature. It's
kind of It would be kind of a
mess. And that's where git branching comes in.
So basically, what we can do is, earlier
I mentioned how each of these circles represents
a commit, and it represents a series of,
like, packaged code changes. But if each circle
represents a series of packaged code changes, then
it kind of also represents a version of
our code, like a snapshot of what our
code looks like at any one point in
time. So you can think of this as
the version of the code after we've made
this set of changes. And so if we
want So in order for Tony to work
on all of these different things, kind of
simultaneously, then he can branch off. So let's
say that this is the last working version
of our home page, that's the standard one
that everyone's using right now. Then he's branching
off from that and making changes to make
his new home page, but when he wants
to fix this bug for Andrew, he's gonna
go back to the last working version of
the home page in git, and then start
making new changes for his bug fix for
Andrew. Then he can go back again and
make new changes off of that for WebLab
Tinder. And so the benefit of branching is
just that he can make all of these
changes, and Git will remember that he's made
all of these changes to the home page.
So once he's finished WebLab Tinder and this
bug fix, then he can go back and
just keep working where he left off on
this branch. So now I'm going to demo
how to create a new branch in Git.
Okay. So we have our there's a command
called git checkout, and git checkout, the purpose
of it is to switch from one branch
to another. If I do git branch, then
I can see all of the branches that
I have. Right now, there's only one, that's
main. But if I do git checkout dash
b, dash b says create a new branch,
I'm gonna call it cat, I don't know.
Now, I created a new branch and I
switched to it. So if I do git
branch again, then I can see that there
is the main branch, and now there's a
cat branch, and the current branch I'm on
is the cat branch. And so let's say
I'm going to make some more changes to
my file, and I'm going to do git
status, check out, yep, git notices that I
made those changes. I'm going to add abby.txt
to add that change to my staging area.
So now you can see it's in the
staging area. I'm gonna commit lots of cats.
And so now, if you think in your
head about what the object diagraph, what the
git graph for this is going to look
like, if I git log here, I see
both my original change that was on my
original branch, and then the new change that
I just made on my new branch. But
if I go back, if I git checkout
back to main, and then I git log
here, then I only see the original branch.
And so my object graph looks something a
little bit like this. Where I have my
original commit on the main branch, and then
this is my cat branch, and then I
have a new commit on my cat branch.
Okay. Same as before, gonna give you a
chance to try it out yourselves. Add yourself
to the queue if you get stuck. Actually,
before I go on, does anyone have any
questions or confusions about what I was just
talking about? I can't tell if the silence
means that y'all are all confused or y'all
are all good and just, like, working. Alright.
If you got lost or confused, feel free
to add yourself to the queue and one
of our amazing staff members could help you.
Even while I'm yapping, you can ask the
other staff for help. And also, if you
got completely lost and don't know where we're
going now, please do not stress out. You'll
be fine. And we can get you caught
up on whatever you got confused on, either
after lecture or at office hours, or you
can your friends can help you as well.
So unfortunately, I have to keep us moving
along. So what is happening in the object
graph when we create a branch? Well, whichever
commit we were on when we created our
branch, that's gonna be the one we're branching
off from. So I can create new commands
in the WebLab Tinder branch, I can commit
or I can switch back to the main
branch and create new commits there. And then
let's say that I was working, or Tony
was working on the WebLab Tinder branch and
he was making his commits, And then someone
else was working on the main branch, and
they were fixing some bugs or something like
that. And now we wanna put these commits
back together and merge WebLab Tinder and bring
all of those changes into main. How do
we do that? That's something called merging. So
basically, if I want to merge all my
commits from my cat's branch into my main
branch, then I hate this Zoom thing. Then
let's see. So right now, I'm on main.
If I were on what did I call
my branch? Cat? I'll do git branch to
see. I called it cat. So if I
check out cat and I'm on cat, then
I can't merge cat into main. I need
to be on main in order to merge
cat back in. So I'll check out main.
And you'll notice that when I check out
different branches, the version of the code in
my Versus Code window will change based on
whatever the most recent commit in that particular
branch is. So now, all I can do
is all I have to do is you
git merge cat, and that will merge the
changes from cat into main. And so now
you'll notice that I'm in main, but I
have all the changes that I made on
the cat branch. And then typically, practice is
just shut up. Good practice is to delete
the branch that I was on before, now
that I'm done with it, now that all
the changes have been merged into main. Alright.
Same as before? Oh, wait. Sorry. I am
not going to okay. I'm not gonna give
you time to work on that yourselves because
it's pretty quick, and we're going to actually
go into more detail on merging in the
second git lecture that we have at the
end of this week. Okay. So when we
put them back together, the object graph looks
something like this. It's not quite the same
as this. We'll go into more detail on
that later. But then the question that we
have finally is, well, how does collaboration work
then? Because we did all of this stuff
with Git, branching, creating new Git repos, creating
commits, etcetera, but all of that was locally
on our own computer. How are we supposed
to share this and collaborate with other people?
And that's where a server such as GitHub
comes in. So GitHub is just a giant
server somewhere that hosts all of our code.
And so there will now be a version
How this works is there will now be
a version of our code on GitHub, a
version of our code on our own computers,
and the computers of whoever we're collaborating with.
And so this introduces interesting complexity because now
we have another independent local copy of our
code on GitHub. So let's say that Nick
is working, and there's a copy of his
code on his computer, and the GitHub is
updated with what he's got on his computer.
And now Tony wants to join in. He's
going to do git clone on the repo
in GitHub, and we'll show you how to
do that pretty soon. So he's gonna git
clone that, and now there's a copy of
the object graph, like all the commits that
have been made, the full history, and all
of the files, of course, on his computer
that exactly matches everything else. Now if Tony
wants to make some commands, some commits, sorry,
some changes, he'll make his commit, and then
he'll use a command called git push to
update whatever GitHub has with whatever he has,
with the commits that he just made. And
if Nick wants to take the commit that
Tony just pushed onto the remote server and
bring it onto his local development environment, he'll
use the command git fetch, and that basically
just looks and updates whatever he's got on
his computer with whatever was added to the
remote server. But then he can do something
called git pull, and how that's different from
git fetch is that git pull actually merges
the command, the commits from the remote server
into what he has locally. So if he
does git pull, then it will actually update
his Versus code with the commit that Tony
had made. So the basic commands that you
need to know are git clone to take
a repo and bring it onto your computer,
and then you can make your commits, and
then you push, git push, to bring those
commands to update the remote server with those
commits that you made. And then git pull
to pull those commits that other people have
made and put onto GitHub onto your local
computer, your local development environment. And then another
command that we'll be using a lot in
web lab workshops, which you actually should never
use in practice, but for our jank web
lab workshop development setup, we use this. It's
called git reset dash dash hard. There should
be two dashes there. And that wipes all
of the uncommitted, unstaged local changes that you've
made. So if you were coding and then
you were like, oh, shoot, I don't wanna
do that, you do git reset dash dash
hard and that just wipes everything except what
has been committed already. Okay. That was it
for git. Please, everyone, stand up. It's been
a long time of sitting. Get a good
stretch. And go to weblab.is/feedback to give me
feedback on that lecture that I just gave.
It's, like, super quick. It'll take thirty seconds.
And we'll be doing this after every single
lecture so that we can get good data
on what you guys liked and what you
guys had trouble with. Alright. Take a two
minute break before we move on to our
next lecture.